---
layout: post
title:  "Aiwa AD-F410 Restoration"
date:   2023-03-02 20:00:00 +0000
author: Jack Jazrawy-Brown
---
Cassettes are cool. I’ve been collecting them for a while, and have until recently been listening on an old Toshiba Walkman, which doesn't sound too great even for a tape player. I don’t think my Walkman was ever a terribly expensive piece of kit, and it would never compete with a proper Sony model; so a few weeks ago I set up an eBay alert for full size tape decks, and before long came across a listing for an Aiwa AD-F410 cassette deck. I didn’t know much about the deck, but an internet search revealed it was an early nineties machine with Dolby B and C noise cancellation.

One of the things that I find interesting about the burgeoning cassette revival is how little it seems to have affected the market for tape decks. Sales of cassette tapes have increased dramatically over the past few years, with numerous popular musicians releasing albums on tape. Despite this, there continues to be a fairly steady stream of second hand decks coming up on eBay for moderately low prices. My best guess is that the ubiquity of the Walkman in pop culture has led to the average cassette listener to opt for handhelds over full size decks, leaving demand for the latter far higher than supply. In any case, I frequently saw decks going for around £30.00 at the lower end, with some fancier models getting into three figures. Of course, some decks went for far more - for example, those produced by the fabled hi-fi company Nakamichi tended to stray far outside of my price range. There was also a distinction between professionally serviced machines, and more ‘garage sale’ type listings, with the latter typically seeming a little riskier.

My Aiwa machine had a starting bid of £17.50, which to my eyes seemed like a bargain. It was certainly one of the cheaper listings at the time, and I assumed it would go up significantly before time was up. However, the end of the auction drew near and no one had bid. My eBay strategy (shamefully) generally consists of making my bid at the last possible second, hopefully preventing other bidders from having time to respond, and this often works quite well. I watched the minutes tick by and eventually bid in the last 15 seconds of the auction. To my surprise, I was the only bidder, and managed to secure an extremely cheap tape deck! Jubilation ensued as my machine was shipped a few days later, arriving in a large box a couple of weeks after the auction.

I rather excitedly took out the tape deck and set it on my kitchen table. It seemed to be in OK condition - not overly clean, but nothing missing, which is usually a good sign. I plugged it in and pushed the power switch, which had a highly satisfying spring-loaded feel to it. The front panel lit up! I rushed upstairs to grab a tape, slid it into the slot, and hit play. Cue an anticlimactic click and unpleasant buzzing noise. I tried poking around the play heads and flipping the tape, but had more or less the same result - this tape deck was not happy. I unplugged it and had a think.

Despite the obvious issues, I could think of a few positives. One, sound was definitely coming out of the headphone jack, and pressing ‘play’ or ‘pause’ caused this sound to change - in my view, this meant whatever circuitry was responsible for amplifying the sound from the play head was probably working properly. The machine powered on, which was good news, as my ability to fix electrical issues is definitely limited. So, resolving not to give up, I unscrewed the top panel and slid it off. I was relieved to see that nothing was obviously wrong with the circuit board - no exploded capacitors or corroded wires! As a nineties machine, this tape deck’s circuit is pretty integrated, with most of the processing happening within chips. This meant the main mechanical point of failure was most likely the transport. Removing a further four screws and a couple of cables allowed this piece of machinery to be lifted out and inspected. I pretty quickly identified the problem - the transport’s belt had transformed into so much noxious black goo. The stuff was everywhere, and definitely wasn’t driving anything in its current state.

This was a little frustrating, but luckily belt replacement is a pretty standard operation on tape decks of a certain age. I opened up eBay and had quickly found a pair of replacement belts for so much pocket change. Rather pleased that someone out there was still making belt kits for this particular machine, I placed an order. Without the belts there wasn’t much else to be done, except give the machine a good clean. I used a significant amount of isopropyl alcohol to get as much of the black goo off as I could, and gently dusted the less delicate parts of the machine’s insides. I cleaned the front panel using the same stuff, and eventually had it looking pretty smart; underneath the grime, the deck was in pretty great condition. I labelled the screws, placed the top panel back in place, and put the deck away.

A few days later my belts arrived in the post. I re-dismantled the transport and set about coaxing them into place. This was a very fiddly job, and it took a good few tries until the belts stayed in place. I’m sure there’s a proper way of doing this, but I don’t know what it is, so I essentially poked the belt with a screwdriver until it stayed put. Then disaster struck. During my final reassembly of the transport, I put a little too much pressure on the solder joint that provides power to the motor, pulling the wire free. I cursed profusely. Inspecting the damage, it didn’t look too catastrophic - a single wire had disconnected from the little dome of solder it was supposed to be attached to. Nonetheless, I reassembled the deck and plugged it in, hoping I hadn’t broken anything too significant. Thankfully, it still powered on, and the front panel lit up. I put a tape in the slot and hit play. Unsurprisingly, nothing happened. However, when I touched the broken wire to the solder joint, the motor whirred into life. I plugged in a pair of headphones, and miraculously King Gizzard’s ‘Live in London’ started playing. I had fixed my tape deck, and then promptly broken it again.

Filled with renewed purpose, I opted to take the deck to my parent’s house, where I knew an old soldering iron was languishing in a cupboard somewhere. I hadn’t soldered before, but I figured this would be a good place to start, as the joint was large and easily accessible. After a rather awkward train journey, I got the deck into the garage. I stripped the loose wire with a penknife and plugged in the soldering iron.

The soldering iron was a fairly primitive affair, essentially a metal stick connected to 240 volts. Nonetheless, it got up to temperature rapidly. I cleaned it on a wet sponge and propped the tape deck up on the workbench. After a fiddly few minutes trying to get the joint to hold, I was pretty sure I had managed it (without destroying any other parts of the machine in the process). I carefully carried it back inside and plugged it in… and success! The motor whirred and music once again came out of the headphone jack. Both Dolby modes worked perfectly, and the sound quality was fantastic - a really pleasant surprise. I screwed everything back together for the last time.

A few thoughts on the AD-F410, which is in my opinion, an excellent tape deck. It lacks any particularly exciting features, but sounds great. There’s almost no detectable modulation, and very little noise. It features a thing called ‘anti modulation tape stabilisation’ which I quite like - essentially a big spring loaded block that keeps cassettes as still as possible during playback. It’s well built, and has a sleek black finish. While things like auto-reverse would be nice to have, I don’t think it’s worth complaining when the thing cost £17 (and provided some entertainment along the way). And I have to say, I quite like the satisfaction of owning something useful that I managed to fix myself.
